# pyControl data

Log files generated by pyControl experiments are text files whose name is determined by the subject ID, start date and time, e.g. *m001-2018-01-30-214942.txt*

An example data file might read:

```text
I Experiment name  : example_experiment
I Task name : button
I Subject ID : m001
I Start date : 2018/01/30 21:49:42

S {'LED_on': 1, 'LED_off': 2}

E {'button_press': 3}

D 0 2
D 8976 3
D 8976 1
P 8976 This is the output of a print statement
D 10162 3
D 10163 2
```

Lines begining `I` contain infomation about the session and experiment.  

The single line begining `S` is a Python dictionary containing the state names and corresponding IDs.

The single line begining `E` is a Python dictionary containing the event names and corresponding IDs.

Lines begining `D` are data lines with format `D timestamp ID` where *timestamp* is the time in milliseconds since the start of the framework run and *ID* is a state ID (indicating a state transition) or an event ID (indicating an event occured).

Lines begining `P` are the output of print statements with format *P timestamp printed_output*. 

Lines begining `!` indicate that an error occured during the framework run and contain the error message.

--- 

# Importing data

The file [data_import.py](https://bitbucket.org/takam/pycontrol/src/default/tools/data_import.py) contains tools for importing pyControl data into Python for analysis.

The data import module has the following dependencies:

- Python 3.5+

- numpy

---

## Session

The `Session` class is used to import a pyControl data file and represent it as a Python object.  

**Example usage:**

```python
import data_import as di # Import the data import module.

# Instantiate session object from data file.
session = di.Session('path//to//session//file')

session.events # List of state entries and events in order they occured.  
               # Each item is a namedtuple with fields 'time' & 'name', such that
               # you can get the name and time of event/state entry x with x.name
               # and x.time respectively.

session.times # Dictionary with keys that are the names of the framework events 
              # and states, and values which are Numpy arrays of the times (in
              # milliseconds  since the start of the framework run) at which
              # the event/state entry occured.

session.print_lines # List of all the lines output by print statements during the 
                    # framework run, each line starts with the time in ms
                    # at which it was printed.

```

**Class reference** 

```python
class Session(file_path, int_subject_IDs=True)
```

*Arguments:*

`file_path` Path of the pyControl data file to import.

`int_subject_IDs` If *True*, subject ID is converted to integer, e.g. *'m012'* is converted to *12*.  Otherwise subject ID is a string.

*Attributes:*

`Session.file_name` Name of data file.

`Session.experiment_name` Name of experiment.

`Session.task_name` Name of the pyControl task used to generate the file.

`Session.subject_ID` ID of subject.

`Session.datetime` The date and time that the session started stored as a [datetime](https://docs.python.org/3/library/datetime.html#datetime-objects) object.

`Session.datetime_string` The date and time that the session started stored as a string of format 'YYYY-MM-DD HH:MM:SS'

`Session.events` List of state entries and events in order they occured.  Each item is a namedtuple with fields 'time' & 'name', such that you can get the name and time of event/state entry x with x.name and x.time respectively.

`Session.times` Dictionary with keys that are the names of the framework events and states and values which are Numpy arrays of the times (in milliseconds since the start of the framework run) at which the event/state entry occured.

`Session.print_lines` List of all the lines output by print statements during the framework run, each line starts with the time in milliseconds at which it was printed.

---

## Experiment

The `Experiment` class is used to import all data files from a given experiment (stored in a single folder) and represent the experiment as a Python object. The experiment class has a method *get_sessions* which can be used to flexibly select sessions from specific subjects and times.

**Example usage:**

```python
import data_import as di # Import the data import module.

# Instantiate experiment object from data folder.
experiment = di.Experiment('path//to//experiment//folder') 

# Save sessions as a .pkl file to speed up subsequent loading of experiment.
experiment.save()

# Return session number 1 for all subjects.
experiment.get_sessions(subject_IDs='all', when=1)

# Return session numbered 1,3 or 5 for all subjects.
experiment.get_sessions(subject_IDs='all', when=[1,3,5]) 

# Return sessions from specified subjects and date.
experiment.get_sessions(subject_IDs=[12,13], when='2017-06-23') 

```

**Class reference** 

```python
class Experiment(folder_path, int_subject_IDs=True)
```

*Arguments:*

`folder_path` Path of the pyControl data folder to import.

`int_subject_IDs` If *True*, subject ID is converted to integer, e.g. *'m012'* is converted to *12*.  Otherwise subject ID is a string.

*Attributes:*

`Experiment.folder_name` Name of the experiment folder.

`Experiment.path` Path of the experiment folder

`Experiment.sessions` List of all sessions in experiment.

`Experiment.subject_IDs` List of all subject IDs

`Experiment.n_subjects` Number of subjects.

*Methods:*

`Experiment.save()`

 Save all sessions as *.pkl* file. Speeds up subsequent instantiation of experiment as sessions do not need to be created from data files.

`Experiment.get_sessions(subject_IDs='all', when='all')`

Returns a list of sessions which match specified subject IDs and time. 

*subject_IDs* argument can be a list of subject IDs or *'all'* to select sessions from all subjects.  

*when* argument determines session numbers or dates to select, see examples below:

```python
when = 'all'      # All sessions
when = 1          # Sessions numbered 1
when = [3,5,8]    # Session numbered 3,5 & 8
when = [...,10]   # Sessions numbered <= 10
when = [5,...]    # Sessions numbered >= 5
when = [5,...,10] # Sessions numbered 5 <= n <= 10
when = '2017-07-07' # Select sessions from date '2017-07-07'
when = ['2017-07-07','2017-07-08'] # Select specified list of dates
when = [...,'2017-07-07'] # Select session with date <= '2017-07-07'
when = ['2017-07-01',...,'2017-07-07'] # Select session with '2017-07-01' <= date <= '2017-07-07'.
```

--- 

## Analog data

pyControl analog data files (*'.pca'* file extension) are binary data files created by [analog inputs](hardware.md#analog-input) and other source of analog data such as [rotary encoders](hardware.md#rotary-encoder).  They consist of alternating timestamps and data samples, both saved as 4 byte little endian signed integers.  The function `load_analog_data` loads a pyControl analog data file into Python, returning a numpy array whose first column is timestamps and second column data samples.  

```python
analog_data_array = load_analog_data('path//to//analog_data_file.pca')
```
